README.md, before:

# Multi-Language Audio Processing and Video Generator


![alt text](assets/demo_images/demo_resulam_video_generation_pipeline.jpg)




This Python script is an automated video production pipeline for creating educational language-learning videos. It generates videos with synchronized multi-language text overlays, dynamic background images, and custom branding from audio files and sentence lists. Optimized for the "Guide de conversation trilingue" series, this tool streamlines the creation of engaging content for African languages.

The pipeline consists of modular, independent scripts. Each module can be executed separately, provided the necessary audio, text, and image resources are available.


![Demo of pipeline result](assets/demo_images/demo_image1.png)

## Core Features ✨

* **Automated Generation**: Produces videos directly from organized sentence lists and audio files.
* **Dynamic Backgrounds**: Switches background images for each new chapter.
* **Multi-Language Support**: Supports a wide range of African languages.
* **Custom Branding**: Includes customizable branding with a logo and a "Please Support Resulam" banner.
* **Parallel Processing**: Utilizes available CPU cores for efficient parallel video rendering.

The script was initialy designed to produce videos for the book "Guide de conversation trilingue Français-anglais-fe'efe'e: French-Fè'éfě'è-English Phrasebook" series by Shck Tchamna [https://www.amazon.com/dp/B099TNLQL2, https://www.amazon.com/dp/B09B5DSVKL]. The books have been translated into multiple African languages, including Wolof, Duala, Ewondo, Swahili, Ewe, Kikongo, Yoruba, Igbo, Hausa, Fulfulde, and others. They consist of approximately 2044 sentences across 32 chapters, organized as follows:
"1-173": "Chap1",
"174-240": "Chap2",
"241-258": "Chap3",
...
"1965-1999": "Chap31",
"2000-2044": "Chap32"

## Compatibility & Installation

⚠️ **IMPORTANT: This project does _not_ work with the latest versions of MoviePy or Pillow!**

API changes in newer releases (e.g., MoviePy 2.x, Pillow 10+) will cause critical errors. Newer versions (e.g., MoviePy 2.x or Pillow 10+) will cause errors due to API changes and deprecations (notably `Image.ANTIALIAS`).

Install the required versions directly:

```bash
moviepy==1.0.3
Pillow==9.5.0
```

For streamlined installation, use the provided requirements.txt file:
`pip install -r requirements.txt`


## FFmpeg Installation (Required)

This project relies heavily on FFmpeg for audio and video processing. You must have FFmpeg installed and available in your system PATH for the pipeline to work.

### How to install FFmpeg on Windows

1. Download FFmpeg:
	- Go to https://www.gyan.dev/ffmpeg/builds/
	- Download the latest "release full" build (for example `ffmpeg-release-full.7z`).
2. Extract the archive:
	- Use 7-Zip (https://www.7-zip.org/) or a similar extractor to unpack the `.7z` file.
	- Inside the extracted folder find the `bin` directory (it contains `ffmpeg.exe`).
3. Add FFmpeg to your system PATH:
	- Copy the full path to the `bin` folder (for example `C:\ffmpeg\bin`).
	- Open PowerShell as Administrator and run:
	  ```powershell
	  $ffmpegPath = 'C:\path\to\ffmpeg\bin'  # change this to your actual path
	  [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('Path', $env:Path + ";$ffmpegPath", [EnvironmentVariableTarget]::Machine)
	  ```
	- Or add the path via Windows Settings → System → About → Advanced system settings → Environment Variables.
4. Verify installation:
	- Restart PowerShell and run:
	  ```powershell
	  ffmpeg -version
	  ```
	- You should see FFmpeg version information printed. If not, re-check the PATH you added.

Important: After updating your PATH, restart Visual Studio Code so the editor and its integrated terminals pick up the new environment.

FFmpeg is required for the audio/video processing steps in this pipeline. If `ffmpeg -version` fails, the scripts that call ffmpeg will raise a FileNotFoundError.

![FFmpeg and ImageMagick diagram](assets/demo_images/ffmpeg_and_ImageMagick.png)

# ImageMagick (Required for text rendering via MoviePy)

MoviePy's `TextClip` uses ImageMagick under the hood to render text into images. If ImageMagick isn't installed or not available on PATH, MoviePy will raise errors like "WinError 2: The system cannot find the file specified" when creating text clips.

### How to install ImageMagick on Windows

1. Install quickly with winget (recommended):
	```powershell
	winget install --id ImageMagick.ImageMagick -e
	```
	Or with Chocolatey:
	```powershell
	choco install imagemagick -y
	```
	Or download the installer from https://imagemagick.org and run it.
2. During installation, enable the option to add ImageMagick to the system PATH. If offered, enable the legacy "convert" utilities only if you need backwards compatibility.
3. Verify installation in a new PowerShell session:
	```powershell
	magick -version
	convert -version   # optional, only if legacy utilities were installed
	```

If ImageMagick is installed but MoviePy still fails to find it, you can explicitly tell MoviePy which binary to use by setting the `IMAGEMAGICK_BINARY` config option in your code (example already added to `step2_video_production.py`):

```python
from moviepy.config import change_settings
change_settings({"IMAGEMAGICK_BINARY": "magick"})
```

Important: After installing ImageMagick or changing PATH, restart Visual Studio Code so the editor and its integrated terminals pick up the new environment.

# Step 1: Audio Processing 
![Demo audio processing](assets/demo_images/audio_processing.png)

The audio processing module prepares raw audio files for video integration. This is a crucial first step in the pipeline.

**Key Features**
* **Audio Normalization**: Standardizes the loudness (LUFS) and all other audio features of all audio files to match a specified reference track.

* **Silence Padding** : Inserts a consistent duration of silence between audio chunks (e.g., between individual phrases in a sentence) to enhance clarity and pacing. This transforms audio segments like (Phrase 1) + **0.5s silence** + (Phrase 2) into (Phrase 1) + **2s silence** + (Phrase 2).

* **Bilingual Merging** : Automatically combines a foreign language audio track with a local language track.
For instance, `english_1.mp3` and `yoruba_1.mp3` would be merged to form `english_1_yoruba_1.mp3`. Likewise, `english_203.mp3` and `yoruba_203.mp3` would be merged to form `english_203_yoruba_203.mp3`
* **Chapter-Based Output**: Organizes processed audio files into distinct chapter folders.


## Audio Processing Folder Structure
Organize your files as follows
- **EnglishOnly/**: Stores all English MP3 audio files here.
- **Languages/**: Inside the Languages folder, create subdirectories for each language here; e.g., **YorubaPhrasebook/YorubaOnly** for Yoruba audio files.
- For the audios-videos matching sentences, create `Yoruba_english_french_phrasebook_sentences_list.txt` in **YorubaPhrasebook**, with sentences formatted as: `1) language1 | Language2 | Language3;` e.g., `1) Hello.| Ẹ ǹ lẹ́. | Salut.`
- Notice that the language separator is |
- If you only want to display two languages in the Video, then only write 1) language1 | Language2; Example: 6)  I am fine.| Mo wà dáadáa.

**Best Practice:** Duplicate the `assets` folder and rename it to `private_assets`. Place your private audio and text resources inside `private_assets` to keep them separate from public/shared assets. This helps you manage sensitive or proprietary files that should not be distributed with the public repository.

## Customizable Parameters

- **local_language_name = 'yoruba'**: Specify the target local language.
- **SILENCE_THRESH = 1.5**: Chuncks separated by silence longer than this are considered distinct. you can adjust this based on your project.
- **INNER_PAUSE_DURATION = 3**: Desired silence duration between audio chunks.
- **REPEAT_LOCAL_AUDIO = 2**: Set to `2` to repeat the local language audio twice, or `1` if already repeated.
- **FLAG_PAD = True**: Enable (`True`) or disable (`False`) extending silence between chunks.

# Step 2: Video Production Pipeline

This module creates videos by combining the prepared audio and text files with visual assets.


![Demo resulting video](assets/demo_images/demo_image2.png)

## Additional Folders For Video Production

- **`Ads_Images/`**: Stores images to be used as advertisements. An ad is inserted at a customizable interval. The interval frequency is adjustable.
- **`Backgrounds/`**: Contains all background images for the videos. The script cycles through these images sequentially, with one unique background assigned per chapter.

## Video Parameters:
- **`local_language_name`**: Defines the local language for the video content.
- **`font_name_short`**: Specifies the font used for text in the videos.
- **`logo_name`**: The psth of the logo file to be used in the videos.

## Video Production Features:

* **Text-Audio Synchronization**: Maps processed bilingual audio files to their corresponding sentences from the text file.

* **Automated Resizing**: Automatically resizes all background images to a 1980x1080 pixel resolution.

* **Ad Placement**: Allows a portion of the screen (the lower half) to be used for ads or other content.

* **Customizable Logo**: Positions the Resulam logo at the bottom left and right of the video.

* **Start Point Control**: Enables the user to specify a starting sentence number for video production, allowing for easy resumption of a paused task.



![demo image 2](assets/demo_images/demo_image3.png)

[Amazon link to the book series](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B099TNLQL2)

# Step 3: Video Chunks Processor

This final script is a post-production tool that combines multiple individual videos into larger, chapter-based video files.

## Quick benchmark and tuning

- To run a quick ffmpeg micro-benchmark on one sample mp3:

```powershell
python tools\benchmark_pipeline.py --step normalize --sample 1
```

- To tune parallelism before a full run, set env vars in PowerShell like:

```powershell
$env:MAX_WORKERS = 4; $env:FFMPEG_THREADS = 2
python step0_main_pipeline.py
```

Adjust `MAX_WORKERS` and `FFMPEG_THREADS` so that `MAX_WORKERS * FFMPEG_THREADS <=` number of CPU cores on your machine.

Commit message:

chore: update step2 to prefer Pillow instead of ImageMagick; update config and README

README.md, after:

# Multi-Language Audio Processing and Video Generator


![alt text](assets/demo_images/demo_resulam_video_generation_pipeline.jpg)




This Python script is an automated video production pipeline for creating educational language-learning videos. It generates videos with synchronized multi-language text overlays, dynamic background images, and custom branding from audio files and sentence lists. Optimized for the "Guide de conversation trilingue" series, this tool streamlines the creation of engaging content for African languages.

The pipeline consists of modular, independent scripts. Each module can be executed separately, provided the necessary audio, text, and image resources are available.


![Demo of pipeline result](assets/demo_images/demo_image1.png)

## Core Features ✨

* **Automated Generation**: Produces videos directly from organized sentence lists and audio files.
* **Dynamic Backgrounds**: Switches background images for each new chapter.
* **Multi-Language Support**: Supports a wide range of African languages.
* **Custom Branding**: Includes customizable branding with a logo and a "Please Support Resulam" banner.
* **Parallel Processing**: Utilizes available CPU cores for efficient parallel video rendering.

The script was initialy designed to produce videos for the book "Guide de conversation trilingue Français-anglais-fe'efe'e: French-Fè'éfě'è-English Phrasebook" series by Shck Tchamna [https://www.amazon.com/dp/B099TNLQL2, https://www.amazon.com/dp/B09B5DSVKL]. The books have been translated into multiple African languages, including Wolof, Duala, Ewondo, Swahili, Ewe, Kikongo, Yoruba, Igbo, Hausa, Fulfulde, and others. They consist of approximately 2044 sentences across 32 chapters, organized as follows:
"1-173": "Chap1",
"174-240": "Chap2",
"241-258": "Chap3",
...
"1965-1999": "Chap31",
"2000-2044": "Chap32"

## Compatibility & Installation

⚠️ **IMPORTANT: This project does _not_ work with the latest versions of MoviePy or Pillow!**

API changes in newer releases (e.g., MoviePy 2.x, Pillow 10+) will cause critical errors. Newer versions (e.g., MoviePy 2.x or Pillow 10+) will cause errors due to API changes and deprecations (notably `Image.ANTIALIAS`).

Install the required versions directly:

```bash
moviepy==1.0.3
Pillow==9.5.0
```

For streamlined installation, use the provided requirements.txt file:
`pip install -r requirements.txt`


## FFmpeg Installation (Required)

This project relies heavily on FFmpeg for audio and video processing. You must have FFmpeg installed and available in your system PATH for the pipeline to work.

### How to install FFmpeg on Windows

1. Download FFmpeg:
	- Go to https://www.gyan.dev/ffmpeg/builds/
	- Download the latest "release full" build (for example `ffmpeg-release-full.7z`).
2. Extract the archive:
	- Use 7-Zip (https://www.7-zip.org/) or a similar extractor to unpack the `.7z` file.
	- Inside the extracted folder find the `bin` directory (it contains `ffmpeg.exe`).
3. Add FFmpeg to your system PATH:
	- Copy the full path to the `bin` folder (for example `C:\ffmpeg\bin`).
	- Open PowerShell as Administrator and run:
	  ```powershell
	  $ffmpegPath = 'C:\path\to\ffmpeg\bin'  # change this to your actual path
	  [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('Path', $env:Path + ";$ffmpegPath", [EnvironmentVariableTarget]::Machine)
	  ```
	- Or add the path via Windows Settings → System → About → Advanced system settings → Environment Variables.
4. Verify installation:
	- Restart PowerShell and run:
	  ```powershell
	  ffmpeg -version
	  ```
	- You should see FFmpeg version information printed. If not, re-check the PATH you added.

Important: After updating your PATH, restart Visual Studio Code so the editor and its integrated terminals pick up the new environment.

FFmpeg is required for the audio/video processing steps in this pipeline. If `ffmpeg -version` fails, the scripts that call ffmpeg will raise a FileNotFoundError.

![FFmpeg and ImageMagick diagram](assets/demo_images/ffmpeg_and_ImageMagick.png)

# Image rendering backend (ImageMagick vs Pillow)

Historically MoviePy's `TextClip` used ImageMagick to rasterize text. That required a working ImageMagick install on PATH and could raise errors like "WinError 2" when the binary wasn't found.

This repository's video production script (`step2_video_production.py`) is configured to avoid that dependency by default: it explicitly disables ImageMagick and forces MoviePy to use Pillow / FreeType for text rendering where possible. Concretely, `step2_video_production.py` calls:

```python
from moviepy.config import change_settings
change_settings({"IMAGEMAGICK_BINARY": None})
```

What this means for you:
- You do NOT need to install ImageMagick just to run `step2_video_production.py` in the typical pipeline flow — the script will prefer Pillow/FreeType and will also fall back to in-repo rasterization for some labels using the bundled Charis TTF.
- If you run other scripts that still call `TextClip` with ImageMagick-specific features, or if you explicitly override settings, ImageMagick may still be required.

If you prefer to install ImageMagick system-wide (optional):

1. Install quickly with winget (recommended):
	```powershell
	winget install --id ImageMagick.ImageMagick -e
	```
	Or with Chocolatey:
	```powershell
	choco install imagemagick -y
	```
	Or download the installer from https://imagemagick.org and run it.
2. During installation, enable the option to add ImageMagick to the system PATH if prompted.
3. Verify installation in a new PowerShell session:
	```powershell
	magick -version
	```

If you install ImageMagick but MoviePy still can't find it, you can explicitly tell MoviePy which binary to use:

```python
from moviepy.config import change_settings
change_settings({"IMAGEMAGICK_BINARY": "magick"})
```

Important: After installing ImageMagick or changing PATH, restart Visual Studio Code so the editor and its integrated terminals pick up the new environment.

# Step 1: Audio Processing 
![Demo audio processing](assets/demo_images/audio_processing.png)

The audio processing module prepares raw audio files for video integration. This is a crucial first step in the pipeline.

**Key Features**
* **Audio Normalization**: Standardizes the loudness (LUFS) and all other audio features of all audio files to match a specified reference track.

* **Silence Padding** : Inserts a consistent duration of silence between audio chunks (e.g., between individual phrases in a sentence) to enhance clarity and pacing. This transforms audio segments like (Phrase 1) + **0.5s silence** + (Phrase 2) into (Phrase 1) + **2s silence** + (Phrase 2).

* **Bilingual Merging** : Automatically combines a foreign language audio track with a local language track.
For instance, `english_1.mp3` and `yoruba_1.mp3` would be merged to form `english_1_yoruba_1.mp3`. Likewise, `english_203.mp3` and `yoruba_203.mp3` would be merged to form `english_203_yoruba_203.mp3`
* **Chapter-Based Output**: Organizes processed audio files into distinct chapter folders.


## Audio Processing Folder Structure
Organize your files as follows
- **EnglishOnly/**: Stores all English MP3 audio files here.
- **Languages/**: Inside the Languages folder, create subdirectories for each language here; e.g., **YorubaPhrasebook/YorubaOnly** for Yoruba audio files.
- For the audios-videos matching sentences, create `Yoruba_english_french_phrasebook_sentences_list.txt` in **YorubaPhrasebook**, with sentences formatted as: `1) language1 | Language2 | Language3;` e.g., `1) Hello.| Ẹ ǹ lẹ́. | Salut.`
- Notice that the language separator is |
- If you only want to display two languages in the Video, then only write 1) language1 | Language2; Example: 6)  I am fine.| Mo wà dáadáa.

**Best Practice:** Duplicate the `assets` folder and rename it to `private_assets`. Place your private audio and text resources inside `private_assets` to keep them separate from public/shared assets. This helps you manage sensitive or proprietary files that should not be distributed with the public repository.

## Customizable Parameters

- **local_language_name = 'yoruba'**: Specify the target local language.
- **SILENCE_THRESH = 1.5**: Chuncks separated by silence longer than this are considered distinct. you can adjust this based on your project.
- **INNER_PAUSE_DURATION = 3**: Desired silence duration between audio chunks.
- **REPEAT_LOCAL_AUDIO = 2**: Set to `2` to repeat the local language audio twice, or `1` if already repeated.
- **FLAG_PAD = True**: Enable (`True`) or disable (`False`) extending silence between chunks.

# Step 2: Video Production Pipeline

This module creates videos by combining the prepared audio and text files with visual assets.


![Demo resulting video](assets/demo_images/demo_image2.png)

## Additional Folders For Video Production

- **`Ads_Images/`**: Stores images to be used as advertisements. An ad is inserted at a customizable interval. The interval frequency is adjustable.
- **`Backgrounds/`**: Contains all background images for the videos. The script cycles through these images sequentially, with one unique background assigned per chapter.

## Video Parameters:
- **`local_language_name`**: Defines the local language for the video content.
- **`font_name_short`**: Specifies the font used for text in the videos.
- **`logo_name`**: The psth of the logo file to be used in the videos.

## Video Production Features:

* **Text-Audio Synchronization**: Maps processed bilingual audio files to their corresponding sentences from the text file.

* **Automated Resizing**: Automatically resizes all background images to a 1980x1080 pixel resolution.

* **Ad Placement**: Allows a portion of the screen (the lower half) to be used for ads or other content.

* **Customizable Logo**: Positions the Resulam logo at the bottom left and right of the video.

* **Start Point Control**: Enables the user to specify a starting sentence number for video production, allowing for easy resumption of a paused task.



![demo image 2](assets/demo_images/demo_image3.png)

[Amazon link to the book series](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B099TNLQL2)

# Step 3: Video Chunks Processor

This final script is a post-production tool that combines multiple individual videos into larger, chapter-based video files.

## Quick benchmark and tuning

- To run a quick ffmpeg micro-benchmark on one sample mp3:

```powershell
python tools\benchmark_pipeline.py --step normalize --sample 1
```

- To tune parallelism before a full run, set env vars in PowerShell like:

```powershell
$env:MAX_WORKERS = 4; $env:FFMPEG_THREADS = 2
python step0_main_pipeline.py
```

Adjust `MAX_WORKERS` and `FFMPEG_THREADS` so that `MAX_WORKERS * FFMPEG_THREADS <=` number of CPU cores on your machine.
